# Instructions

## General Information

This python (3.13) repo uses the astral.sh stack along other CLIs:
1. `devcontainer` - environment isolation
2. `just` - common commands management
3. `pre-commit` - triggers all of the following CLIs
4. `uv` - venv and CLIs management
5. `ruff` - format and lint
6. `ty` - type checking
7. `pytest` - testing
8. `tox` - tests automation
9. `typos` - spell checking
10. `commitlint` - conventional commits adherence
11. `pip-audit` - dependency security
12. `trivy` - general security
13. `claude` - for an objective AI review
14. `lintok` - file size linter
15. `ties` - file-to-file sync with transformations
16. `yamlfmt` - yaml format and lint
17. `biomejs` - json format and lint
18. `rumdl` - markdown format and lint
19. `lychee` - broken link detection
20. `taplo` - general toml format and lint
21. `pyproject-fmt` - pyproject.toml format and lint
22. `tox-toml-fmt` - tox.toml format and lint

## Git

Commit messages must follow the conventional commits standard like so:  

```text
`<type>`(`<scope>`): `<up-to-60-characters>`  
`<optional-details>`  
Assisted-by: `<name-of-code-assistant>`  
```

## Just Pre-Commit

`just pre-commit` is configured to run all CLIs.  
To run, simply:

```shell
just p
```

With no additional options.  
Before editing anything, **ALWAYS** start with `just p`.  
**NEVER** run a CLI directly before `just p` first.  
Running a CLI directly is a last resort.  

## Code

Any code or file significantly generated or edited by you
must have at least one inline/header comment:  

```text
Generated by `<name-of-code-assistant>`
```

or  

```text
Edited by `<name-of-code-assistant>`  
```

## Edit Attempts

Each sequence of edits and code generation without
`just p` is an Edit Attempt.  
Edit Attempts should be atomic, focused and encapsulated.  

Before any Edit Attempt:
- a descriptive line:

  ```text
  `[EDIT]` `<description>`: `STARTING`  
  ```

After any Edit Attempt:  
- `just p` (to `git add .` & `pre-commit` in a single command)
- a summary line:

  ```text
  `[EDIT]` `<description>`: `<status>`  
  ```

  where `<status>` is `SUCCESS` or `FAILED`
